---
title: "Blog 2: Fear Over Data Centers is Well Founded"
date: 2025-09-21
permalink: /posts/2025/21/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - data centers
  - ai
  - economy
  - data centers
  - mankato
---

<style>
	.serif, #serif, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, h7, h8, h9, p, meta, li {
		font-family: Georgia, "Times New Roman", Times, serif;
	}
</style>


*Drawing the knot which attaches our communities to capitalism tighter does more harm than good.*

**News Article**  
[Counterpoint | Let facts, not fear, guide the data center debate](https://www.startribune.com/greater-mn-data-centers-economy-environment-impacts/601476603)

<hr style="background-color: #000; border: none; height: 2px">

### Argument
In his article on the data center debate in Greater Mankato, Mr. Wilke lays out the following approximate argument:

<ol>
	<li>Data centers are an important economic stimulant that creates jobs, income for local businesses, and expand the property-tax base.</li>
	<li>Concern over the secrecy of data center development is ill-founded and ignorant.</li>
	<li>Certain people in the community are better situated to make development decisions, and that does not include students.</li>
	<li>Strict environmental policies already exist in Minnesota that would prevent data centers from causing problems for the community.</li>
	<li>Not participating in the race for data centers would put Minnesota at a disadvantage in regard to its neighbors.</li>
	<li>Given all of these points, data centers should be encouraged, albeit carefully, in the Mankato area.</li>


</ol>

### Rebuttal
Local communities are often corralled into welcoming data centers with phrases like "transformative investment," "high quality jobs," and "economic ripple effects," but the idea that data centers will turn a normal town into a bustling economic success story has little substance. The very axioms upon which this way of thinking is built represent biased thinking, but, even if you take the idea that the generation of wealth in one place benefits the community at face value, there is little evidence that data centers have this effect. Data centers are profitable because <a href='https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai-data-center-job-creation-48038b67?gaa_at=eafs&gaa_n=ASWzDAizg7t2hIV3O1tcHNTD7JSHzuAS4FyN_RiSwRxJ7F9yBKzheMjXlMwD1ULRFj8%3D&gaa_ts=68d0a83f&gaa_sig=du9YmhYaLhhPzD_WPN0wRb0zWaGasbisVoeNHuLbrgsralUiWVXKlKiKb1BVOGbEsbsF34r8x0PQLgp4OQTx8Q%3D%3D'>they take very little labor to keep operational</a>; they may temporarily create demand for local businesses and require new jobs as they are being built, but the long term benefits are moot. There are other ways of stimulating heavy industry that actually have long-term benefits for community members; take infrastructure spending, for example. More broadly, this supply-economics mindset is just another perversion of Reaganomics: making the big tech companies richer is unlikely to improve the lives of the working class.

Mr. Wilke raises the valid point that concerns about the secrecy surrounding data center development plans are often misdirected, as private negotiation is a normal part of the development planning process. However, this is tantamount to strawmanning because the secrecy is not the major concern that people have with data centers. This argument distracts from the main point, which is in regards to the data centers themselves, not the circumstances surrounding their implementation. If this creates more pressure for disclosure and clarity from leaders, than that concern should be taken in stride.

One strange point that the article emphasizes is about who should be making involved in making the decisions regarding data centers. Specifically, Mr. Wilke specifies, "Residents, local officials and business leaders are closest to the issues and understand our community’s needs and values." At first, it seems like superfluous reasoning, but then it becomes apparent which group Mr. Wilke is conveniently excluding: students. Mankato is a college town after all, and students have a tendency to be less supportive of big tech's rapid expansion in the form of data centers. While he may not have the courage to say it outright, exclusion is an attack on the identity of the opponents of his pro-data center position, without a logical reason: ad hominem, in other words. Students may come and go, but their interests don't, and those interests are just as valid as any other community member.

Minnesota has various laws and restrictions that would limit the resources data centers use, and it is true that these policies make projects like big data centers safer. However, it is an inductive fallacy to presume that just because there are some obstructions to the overconsumption of water or energy by a data center, the data center will behave nicely. Under capitalism, the only motivator is profit, and if it is more profitable for a data center to take a disproportionate amount of water, then one can be sure that it will do so. Maybe it would encourage improved renewable energy growth, but do we really need a data center for that?

The idea that just because neighbors like Iowa, North Dakota, or Nebraska are building data centers, Minnesota should as well, is textbook bandwagon. Sure, avoiding data centers could leave Minnesota behind as the technology industry grows, but it could just as easily avoid an unnecessary detour into what becomes a big waste of resources.

### Conclusion
Of course, making hasty decisions based on fear alone is not a smart decision making framework. Nevertheless, Mr. Wilke's opinion is driven by its own share of fear: he begins by claiming, "data centers are the backbone of the digital economy," and the driving motivation for encouraging their growth is a fear of being left behind. To say that data centers are the cornerstone of technological progress is to say nothing at all: the technology industry could be said to be built on computer chips, transistors, software development, the power grid, or any other important piece because they are all connected. There is no doubt that a widely beneficial, safe, and useful data center project is not inconceivable, but, at this early stage, it behooves us to be cautious in regards to building something that has been known to be problematic in many cases.

